Blog: add blog post on Glue Schema Registry with MSK (#57)
localstack/localstack.github.io: content/blog/2022-07-26-schema-evolution-glue-msk/index.md

---
title: Schema Evolution with Glue Schema Registry and Managed Streaming for Kafka (MSK) using LocalStack

> description: Find incompatibilities early or even avoid them alltogether when developing Kafka producers or consumers! Learn how to test data schema evolution by using Managed Streaming for Kafka (MSK) with the Glue Schema Registry in LocalStack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Find incompatibilities early or even avoid them altogether when developing Kafka producers or consumers! Learn how to test data schema evolution by using Managed Streaming for Kafka (MSK) with the Glue Schema Registry in LocalStack.
```

> description: Find incompatibilities early or even avoid them alltogether when developing Kafka producers or consumers! Learn how to test data schema evolution by using Managed Streaming for Kafka (MSK) with the Glue Schema Registry in LocalStack.

Reviewer: Would it make sense for the description to be shorter? Ideally we would like to give the reader a purpose of what they would accomplish by reading the article.

Author: Yeah, I was struggling with that when writing it. To be honest, I couldn't come up with a better title which says:
- You can find issues early by using MSK with Glue.
- You can test that with LocalStack.

I'm open for any ideas!

> lead: Find incompatibilities early or even avoid them alltogether when developing Kafka producers or consumers! Learn how to test data schema evolution by using Managed Streaming for Kafka (MSK) with the Glue Schema Registry in LocalStack.

Reviewer: It would be ideal to have the `lead` and `description` distinct.

Author: Hmm, there are no good examples from posts in the past (they either have the same lead and description, or the same title and description). What would be the proper distinction / whats the goal for those? Do you have an idea for the two?

images: ["schema-evolution-glue-msk-poster.png"]
contributors: ["Alexander Rashed"]
date: 2022-07-26
tags: ['tutorial']
leadimage: "schema-evolution-glue-msk-poster.png"
resources:
- src: "schema-evolution-glue-msk-flow.svg"
---

{{< img src="schema-evolution-glue-msk-poster.png" >}}

> [Apache Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org/) is an open-source distributed event store and stream-processing platform.

Reviewer 2: since the main story is schema evolution, maybe we could jump right into the guts and, just for the first paragraph, assume that people know what MSK, Glue, and schema evolution means? then we would have the value proposition directly in the beginning.

then add the TL/DR, and then do a background section, "MSK and Glue Basics".

WDYT?

Reviewer 2: it would also be great to add a short bullet list after the intro paragraph about "what you will learn in this article"

It is used to capture data generated by producers and distribute it among its consumers.
Kafka is known for its scalability, with reports of production environments scaling to [trillions of messages per day](https://engineering.linkedin.com/blog/2019/apache-kafka-trillion-messages).

> With [Amazon Managed Streaming for Apache Kafka (MSK)](https://aws.amazon.com/msk/), AWS provides a service to easily provision Apache Kafka clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With [Amazon Managed Streaming for Apache Kafka (MSK)](https://aws.amazon.com/msk/), AWS provides a service to provision Apache Kafka clusters easily. [LocalStack Pro](https://app.localstack.cloud/) supports [Amazon Managed Streaming for Kafka (MSK)](https://docs.localstack.cloud/aws/managed-streaming-for-kafka/), which enables you to spin up Kafka clusters on your local machine and test the integration of your applications with Amazon MSK.
```

[LocalStack Pro supports Amazon Managed Streaming for Kafka (MSK)](https://docs.localstack.cloud/aws/managed-streaming-for-kafka/), which enables you to spin up Kafka clusters on your local machine and testing the integration of your applications with Amazon MSK.

> Kafka clusters are often used as the central messaging infrastructure in complex microservice environments.
> However, the continuous and independent development of the individual microservices - the data producers and consumers - can make it hard to coordinate and evolve data schemas over time without introducing application failures due to incompatibilities.
> A common solution to this problem is to use a schema registry which provides for the validation of schema changes, preventing any unsafe changes and subsequent application failures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kafka clusters are often used as the central messaging infrastructure in complex microservice environments. However, the continuous and independent development of the individual microservices - the data producers and consumers - can make it hard to coordinate and evolve data schemas over time without introducing application failures due to incompatibilities. A common solution to this problem is to use a schema registry that validates schema changes, preventing any unsafe changes and subsequent application failures.
```

Author: As far as I can see, this suggestion only contains the removal of newlines.
Since the markdown dialect used in Hugo doesn't render single new-lines, this wouldn't have an effect on the resulting page and makes diffs a bit harder. Therefore I won't apply this change.

> [AWS Glue Schema Registry](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/glue/latest/dg/schema-registry.html) can be used as such a schema registry, enabling you to validate and evolve streaming data using Apache Avro schemas.
> It can be easily integrated into Java applications for Apache Kafka with [AWS' official open-source serializers and deserializers](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-glue-schema-registry).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[AWS Glue Schema Registry](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/glue/latest/dg/schema-registry.html) can be used as a schema registry, enabling you to validate and evolve streaming data using Apache Avro schemas. It can be easily integrated into Java applications for Apache Kafka with [AWS' official open-source serializers and deserializers](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-glue-schema-registry).
```

Author: As above, I think this change only removes newlines.

<div id="integration-description"></div>
The following chart shows the integration of producers and consumers with Amazon MSK and the AWS Glue Schema Registry:

{{< figure src="schema-evolution-glue-msk-flow.svg" width="100%" alt="Workflow: Glue Schema Registry with MSK">}}

1. Before sending a record, the producer validates that the schema it is using to serialize its records is valid. If the schema is not yet registered, the producer can be configured to automatically register a new schema version.
   - When registering the new schema version, the schema registry validates if the schema is compatible.
   - If the registry detects an incompatibility, the registration is rejected. This ensures that a producer fails early and cannot publish incompatible records in the first place.
2. Once the schema is known to be valid, the producer serializes and compresses the record, and sends it to the Kafka cluster.
3. The serialized and compressed record is read by the consumers.

> 4. The consumer requests the schema from the schema registry (if it is not already cached), and uses the schema to decompress and deserialize the record.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Before sending a record, the producer validates that the schema it is using to serialize its records is valid. We can configure the producer to register a new schema version if the schema is not yet registered.
   - When registering the new schema version, the schema registry validates if the schema is compatible.
   - If the registry detects an incompatibility, the registration is rejected. This ensures that a producer fails early and cannot publish incompatible records in the first place.
2. Once the schema is valid, the producer serializes and compresses the record and sends it to the Kafka cluster.
3. The consumers read the serialized and compressed record.
4. The consumer requests the schema from the schema registry (if it is not already cached) and uses the schema to decompress and deserialize the record.
```

> [AWS Glue Schema Registry is supported by LocalStack Pro as well](https://docs.localstack.cloud/aws/glue/), ultimately allowing you to test the evolution of your data streaming application completely on your local machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[AWS Glue Schema Registry](https://docs.localstack.cloud/aws/glue/) is supported by LocalStack Pro as well, ultimately allowing you to test the evolution of your data streaming application completely on your local machine.
```

> # TL/DR

Reviewer: Can we use a slightly better title?

Reviewer: It would also be possible to shift this entirely on the top for people interested in tech to just move to these parts.

Author: > Can we use a slightly better title?

What is a slightly better title?

> It would also be possible to shift this entirely on the top for people interested in tech to just move to these parts.

That would be possible, but it would be a bit weird with the motivational section above, wouldn't it?

- LocalStack Pro supports Amazon Managed Streaming for Apache Kafka (MSK) and AWS Glue Schema Registry.
- This allows you develop and test your application's data schema evolution locally.
- The code for this tutorial (including a script to execute it step-by-step) can be found in our [localstack-pro-samples repository on GitHub](https://github.com/localstack/localstack-pro-samples/tree/master/glue-msk-schema-registry).

# Prerequisites
For this tutorial you will need:

> - [LocalStack Pro](https://localstack.cloud/pricing/) to emulate Amazon MSK and AWS Glue Schema Registry locally

Reviewer: Can we direct users to: app.localstack.cloud instead? A pricing page might just intimidate them.

Author: `app.localstack.cloud` directly shows a login barrier without any additional information. I personally prefer the pricing page which mentions the trial.
But that's not a strong opinion. ;)
Should I change the link?

>   - Don't worry, if you don't have a subscription yet, you can just get a trial license for free.

Reviewer 2: love it!

> - The [awslocal](https://docs.localstack.cloud/integrations/aws-cli/#localstack-aws-cli-awslocal) command line utility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [awslocal](https://docs.localstack.cloud/integrations/aws-cli/#localstack-aws-cli-awslocal) command line utility
```

- Java 11+
- Maven 3

# Getting started

> At first, we will define our schema. set up our Java project, and generate the Java data classes using the schema.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At first, we will define our schema, set up our Java project, and generate the Java data classes using the schema.
```

## Our initial schema
In our Apache Avro data schema we describe a request to ride a unicorn, including the necessary addresses, a fare, a duration, some preferences, and a customer record:
{{< github repo="localstack/localstack-pro-samples" file="glue-msk-schema-registry/producer/src/main/resources/avro/unicorn_ride_request_v1.avsc" lang="json" ref="cd023a84a3b473984e9c34053d4feb7de8e038c1" >}}

## Project setup
Now we can set up our Java project with one module for the `producer` and another module for the `consumer`.
Both modules have their schema in the `src/main/resources` folder.
```
.
├── consumer
│   ├── pom.xml
│   └── src
│       └── main
│           └── resources
│               └── avro
│                   └── unicorn_ride_request_v1.avsc
├── producer
│   ├── pom.xml
│   └── src
│       └── main
│           └── resources
│               └── avro
│                   └── unicorn_ride_request_v1.avsc
└── pom.xml
```

> In our root pom, we configure the `producer` and the `consumer` module, some shared dependencies (most notibly `software.amazon.glue:schema-registry-serde`), and the `avro-maven-plugin` to generate Java classes for the schema:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our root pom, we configure the `producer` and the `consumer` module, some shared dependencies (most notably `software.amazon.glue:schema-registry-serde`), and the `avro-maven-plugin` to generate Java classes for the schema:

```

        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>com.beust</groupId>
            <artifactId>jcommander</artifactId>
            <version>1.82</version>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>

    <build>
        <pluginManagement>
            <plugins>
                <plugin>
                    <groupId>org.apache.avro</groupId>
                    <artifactId>avro-maven-plugin</artifactId>
                    <version>1.11.0</version>
                    <executions>
                        <execution>
                            <phase>generate-sources</phase>
                            <goals>
                                <goal>schema</goal>
                            </goals>
                            <configuration>
                                <sourceDirectory>${project.basedir}/src/main/resources/avro/</sourceDirectory>
                                <outputDirectory>${project.basedir}/src/main/java/</outputDirectory>
                            </configuration>
                        </execution>
                    </executions>
                </plugin>
            </plugins>
        </pluginManagement>
    </build>
</project>
```

> While the root pom is a bit lengthy, the `pom.xml` files of the two modules are quite simple.
> They only reference the root pom, activate the `avro-maven-plugin`, and define a main class (we'll go into detail on the actual Java code in [the section below](#implement-a-producer-and-consumer)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the root pom is a bit lengthy, the `pom.xml` files of the two modules are quite simple. They only reference the root pom, activate the `avro-maven-plugin`, and define the main class (we'll go into detail on the actual Java code in [the section below](#implement-a-producer-and-consumer)).
```

Author: As above, I think this change only removes newlines.

The producer's `pom.xml`:
{{< github repo="localstack/localstack-pro-samples" file="glue-msk-schema-registry/producer/pom.xml" lang="xml" ref="cd023a84a3b473984e9c34053d4feb7de8e038c1" >}}

And analogous the consumer's `pom.xml`:
{{< github repo="localstack/localstack-pro-samples" file="glue-msk-schema-registry/consumer/pom.xml" lang="xml" ref="cd023a84a3b473984e9c34053d4feb7de8e038c1" >}}

Now the project is all set up and we can already generate our schema classes from the AVRO schema using the `avro-maven-plugin`:
```
mvn clean generate-sources
```

> After the maven plugin is done, we have all types generated for both, the producer and the consumer:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the maven plugin is done, we have all types generated for both the producer and the consumer:
```

│       └── main
│           ├── java
│               └── cloud
│                   └── localstack
│                       └── demos
│                           └── gluemsk
│                               └── schema
│                                   ├── Customer.java
│                                   ├── ModeOfPayment.java
│                                   ├── RecommendedUnicorn.java
│                                   ├── unicorn_color.java
│                                   ├── UnicornPreferredColor.java
│                                   └── UnicornRideRequest.java
└── producer
    └── src
        └── main
            └── java
                └── cloud
                    └── localstack
                        └── demos
                            └── gluemsk
                                └── schema
                                    ├── Customer.java
                                    ├── ModeOfPayment.java
                                    ├── RecommendedUnicorn.java
                                    ├── unicorn_color.java
                                    ├── UnicornPreferredColor.java
                                    └── UnicornRideRequest.java
``` 

> Since we are just going log the sent and received messages, we need to configure the logging by adding a `log4j.properties` to the `src/main/resources` folder of the two modules:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since we want to log the sent and received messages, we need to configure the logging by adding a `log4j.properties` to the `src/main/resources` folder of the two modules:
```

                    "Topic:" + recordMetaData.topic() + "\t" +
                    "Partition: " + recordMetaData.partition() + "\t" +
                    "Offset: " + recordMetaData.offset() + "\t" +
                    "Timestamp: " + recordMetaData.timestamp());
        } else {
            LOGGER.info("There's been an error from the Producer side");
            e.printStackTrace();
        }
    }
}
```

And finally, we can implement our `startProducer` method which creates the producer using `getProducerConfig` and sends records generated by `getRecord`:
```java
public void startProducer() {
    try (KafkaProducer<String, UnicornRideRequest> producer = new KafkaProducer<>(getProducerConfig())) {
        int numberOfMessages = Integer.parseInt(str_numOfMessages);
        LOGGER.info("Starting to send records...");
        for (int i = 0; i < numberOfMessages; i++) {
            UnicornRideRequest rideRequest = getRecord(i);
            String key = "key-" + i;
            ProducerRecord<String, UnicornRideRequest> record = new ProducerRecord<>(topic, key, rideRequest);
            producer.send(record, new ProducerCallback());
        }
    }
}
```

> [The complete module can be found in our samples repository (along with the rest of the code of this tutorial).](https://github.com/localstack/localstack-pro-samples/blob/cd023a84a3b473984e9c34053d4feb7de8e038c1/glue-msk-schema-registry/producer/)

Reviewer 2: maybe we should add the links to the code a the top of the sections, so readers know it's safe to skip the section?

> [The complete module can be found in our samples repository (along with the rest of the code of this tutorial).](https://github.com/localstack/localstack-pro-samples/blob/cd023a84a3b473984e9c34053d4feb7de8e038c1/glue-msk-schema-registry/producer/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The complete module can be found in our [samples repository (along with the rest of the code of this tutorial)](https://github.com/localstack/localstack-pro-samples/blob/cd023a84a3b473984e9c34053d4feb7de8e038c1/glue-msk-schema-registry/producer/).
```

   [AvroDeserializer][DEBUG] Finished de-serializing Avro message
   [GlueSchemaRegistryDeserializerFactory][DEBUG] Returning Avro de-serializer instance from GlueSchemaRegistryDeserializerFactory
   [GlueSchemaRegistryDefaultCompression][DEBUG] Decompression :: Compressed record length: 0KB
   [GlueSchemaRegistryDefaultCompression][DEBUG] Decompression :: Decompressed record length: 0KB
   [AvroDeserializer][DEBUG] Length of actual message: 121
   [AvroDeserializer][DEBUG] Finished de-serializing Avro message
   ```

## Schema Evolution
In the course of this tutorial, we have implemented a Kafka producer and a consumer which integrate with the Glue Schema Registry.

> But the full potential of the Glue Schema Registry is unlocked when performing a schema evolution, i.e. whzen running producers and consumers with a new version of an already registered schema.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But the full potential of the Glue Schema Registry is unlocked when performing a schema evolution, i.e., when running producers and consumers with a new version of an already registered schema.
```

Therefore, we will run a few more interesting scenarios to illustrate the benefits of the Schema Registry:
1. Running a producer which automatically registers a new, compatible schema version.
2. Running a producer which is rejected when trying to register a new, incompatible schema version.
3. Running an old consumer which is rejected since it is not compatible with the newly registered schema version.
4. Running an updated consumer which can consume the new schema / records.

> ### 1. Producer registering a new schema version

Reviewer: I'm not sure if its ideal to use numbers in headings.

Author: I don't have a strong opinion on it, I just wanted to directly associate the scenarios in the subsections with the ones shortly outlined above. What do you think? Should I remove the numbers?

```bash
mvn clean install
mvn -pl producer-3 exec:java -Dexec.args="--bootstrap-servers localhost:4511"
```

In the logs we can see that the producer fails when trying to register its new, but incompatible, version of the schema:
```plaintext
...
[AWSSchemaRegistryClient][INFO ] Registered the schema version with schema version id = 8f625284-07b4-442e-83ae-395cd7853746 and with version number = 3 and status FAILURE
...
[WARNING] 
com.amazonaws.services.schemaregistry.exception.AWSSchemaRegistryException: Register schema :: Call failed when registering the schema with the schema registry for schema name = unicorn-ride-request-schema-avro
    at com.amazonaws.services.schemaregistry.common.AWSSchemaRegistryClient.registerSchemaVersion (AWSSchemaRegistryClient.java:310)
...

```

### 3. Outdated consumers
We've seen how the producer's schema evolution works in the previous scenarios.
Now, we'll take a closer look at our consumer.

In our [first schema evolution scenario](#1-producer-registering-a-new-schema-version), the producer registered a new version of the schema and afterwards published records with that schema.

> The `BACKWARD` schema compatibility guarantees that updated consumers can read older records, i.e. the consumers need to be updated before the producers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `BACKWARD` schema compatibility guarantees that updated consumers can read older records, i.e., the consumers need to be updated before the producers.
```

- Copy the `consumer` directory and rename it to `consumer-2`.
- Set a new artifact ID in the `pom.xml` of the module:
  ```xml
    ...
    <artifactId>consumer-2</artifactId>
    ...
  ```
- Add the new module to the root `pom.xml`:
  ```xml
  <modules>
    <module>producer</module>
    <module>producer-2</module>
    <module>producer-3</module>
    <module>consumer</module>
    <module>consumer-2</module>
  </modules>
  ```
- Replace the `unicorn_ride_request_v1.avsc` with the new version used by `producer-2` (`unicorn_ride_request_v2.avsc`).
- Re-generate the Java classes for the schema:
  ```bash
  mvn clean generate-sources
  ```

[The complete module can be found in our samples repository (along with the rest of the code of this tutorial).](https://github.com/localstack/localstack-pro-samples/blob/cd023a84a3b473984e9c34053d4feb7de8e038c1/glue-msk-schema-registry/consumer-2/)

Our new consumer, based on the latest version of the schema, will be able to successfully consume the records published by the new producer:
```bash
mvn -pl consumer-2 exec:java -Dexec.args="--bootstrap-servers localhost:4511"
```

# Conclusion

> Apache Kafka is used as the core messaging system in complex environments, with independent producers and consumers.
> The individual development of these components make it hard to coordinate and evolve data schemas over time.
> Using the AWS Glue Schema Registry can help you to prevent the usage of incompatible schemas.
> 
> With LocalStack, emulating Amazon Managed Streaming for Kafka and AWS Glue Schema Registry, you can develop and test the next evolution of your data schema locally on your own machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apache Kafka is the core messaging system in complex environments with independent producers and consumers. The individual development of these components makes it hard to coordinate and evolve data schemas over time. Using the AWS Glue Schema Registry can help you to prevent the usage of incompatible schemas.
		
With LocalStack, emulating Amazon Managed Streaming for Kafka and AWS Glue Schema Registry, you can develop and test the next evolution of your data schema locally on your machine.
```

Author: As above, I think this change only removes newlines.
